## Rationale

Both SQLAlchemy and Alembic are great tools, but they have a relatively steep learning curve.
Furthermore, in order to get started you need to do a bunch of steps which are a bit repetitive
(e.g. [the naming conventions
boilerplate](http://alembic.zzzcomputing.com/en/latest/naming.html#integration-of-naming-conventions-into-operations-autogenerate),
updating `env.py`) which means that testing stuff can be a bit tiresome.

What I mainly wanted was a throwaway project/db which I could use to learn the ins and outs without
having to bother with the complexity of a real-world code-base.

Tip: Pull Requests welcome!

## Quickstart

1. You must first define some env variables. For convenience you can just source `envrc`.
   You can edit the file if you want but, unless there is a port or ENV variable name
   conflict, it should be fine to keep the defaults:

``` bash
source envrc
```

2. Start the Postgresql database:

``` bash
docker-compose up -d
```

3. Try connecting to the database:

``` bash
pgcli -U $USER -h $HOST -p $PORT $DB
```

If you defined `$PASS` on `envrc` then you might need to call `pgcli` with `-W` so that it will
prompt you for a password.

4. If you can connect, you are ready to start using SQLAlchemy and Alebmic!

## OK, I can connect, now what?

Whatever you like?!?!

In this repo we have already taken care of the first steps of the [alembic
tutorial](http://alembic.zzzcomputing.com/en/latest/tutorial.html).  This means that we have already
run:

- `alembic init migrations`
- We have already created an SQLAlchemy Base
- configured `migrations/env.py` to use our application's `Base`.
- defined a sample model at `pg/models/definitions.py`.

So, if you want to jump straight into the fun you can start for example by generating your first
migration with:

``` bash
alembic revision --autogenerate -m "Add person table."
```

You can then inspect the migration code (i.e. python) with

``` bash
cat /migrations/versions*
```

and the resultant SQL code with:

``` bash
alembic upgrade --sql +1
```

Finally, you can apply the migration with:

``` bash
alembic upgrade +1
```

If you now connect to `pgcli`, you can test that the new table exists:
```
pgcli -U $USER -h $HOST -p $PORT $DB
# and then on the pgcli console:
\dt
# and again on the pgcli console:
SELECT * FROM person;
```

As always, before committing the migration, make sure that the downgrade step works as intended:

``` bash
alembic downgrade -1
```

## So, now what?

Whatever you like?

I mainly use this to test various things like e.g. the SQL code that gets generated by model
definitions etc.

## Reset database

Running the following commands should get rid of the database instance and its data

``` bash
docker-compose rm --stop --force
docker volume rm sqlalchemyplayground_pg-data
```

If you also want to remove the existing migrations, you can do it with:

``` bash
rm -rf migrations/versions/*
```

